 
 
Jicaque as a Hokan Language
Author(s): Joseph H. Greenberg and  Morris Swadesh
Source: International Journal of American Linguistics, Vol. 19, No. 3 (Jul., 1953), pp. 216-
222
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1263010
Accessed: 11-07-2017 15:04 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1263010?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
International Journal of American Linguistics
This content downloaded from 12.14.13.130 on Tue, 11 Jul 2017 15:04:26 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 JICAQUE AS A HOKAN LANGUAGE
 JOSEPH H. GREENBERG AND MORRIS SWADESH
 COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
 1. The problem
 2. Phonological note
 3. Cognate list
 4. Use of lexical statistics
 5. Cognates in test vocabulary
 6. Hokan-Coahuiltecan relationships
 7. Requirements for further study
 1. Jicaque of Honduras in the past has
 been listed as an isolated language or classed
 with Paya-Lenca and Chibchan,' but we
 find unmistakable evidence that it is a
 Hokan language. In this paper we set forth
 structural and vocabulary correspondences
 to prove the relationship, along with an
 analysis of the place of Jicaque within the
 stock based upon cognate percentages.
 While the main facts of the linguistic
 situation stand out clearly, the limited
 material available for most of the languages
 prevents a full development of phonological
 and morphological details at this time.
 The presence in Jicaque of numerous
 Hokan-Siouan correspondences was first
 noted by Greenberg while making a com-
 parative survey in preparing a paper,
 Historical Linguistics and Unwritten Lan-
 guages, for the International Symposium
 on Anthropology of the Wenner-Gren
 Foundation.2 The subsequent further study
 of the problem by both authors was done
 under the Linguistic Divergence Project
 sponsored by the Columbia Council for
 Research in the Social Sciences.
 1 See Harry Hoijer, Introduction p. 25, Lin-
 guistic Structures of Native America (Viking
 Fund Publication in Anthropology 6, 1946); J.
 Alden Mason, The languages of South American
 Indians p. 174 (Handbook of South American
 Indian, BAE-B 143, vol. 6, 1950.
 2 Subsequently published in Anthropology To-
 day, 265-86 (Chicago, 1951).
 2. The phonological equivalences in Hokan
 have been largely established by Edward
 Sapir's work.3 The Jicaque agreements are
 generally obvious. A special point is that
 xw and x have been replaced by k. Among
 some local dialects of Jicaque, r and n
 replace the 1 found elsewhere. Stem-finals
 have sometimes been changed, presumably
 by contraction with an added suffix. Because
 of the sparsity of Jicaque material no
 attempt has been made to distinguish the
 dialects. This accounts for variant forms
 sometimes given and for the fact that there
 are sometimes two or more distinct equiva-
 lents.
 Jicaque and other forms in this paper
 have been phonemically interpreted and
 orthographically uniformized; any errors
 in the phonemic interpretation are surely
 not of a character that would affect the
 lexical comparisons.
 3. The search for cognates is considerably
 hampered by the meagerness of the avail-
 able Jicaque vocabularies and by their
 emphasis on words, such as plant and
 animal names, which have little utility for
 comparison at a remote time depth. And
 similar problems exist for most of the other
 Hokan languages with which Jicaque has
 to be compared.4 The extent of the compara-
 3 Especially in The Position of Yana in the
 Hokan Stock (UCPAAE 13.1-34, 1917); The
 Hokan and Coahuiltecan Languages (IJAL 1.
 280-90, 1917-20); The Hokan Affinity of Subtiaba
 in Nicaragua AA27. 402-35, 491-527, 1925).
 4 The material on Jicaque is taken from two
 sources: Walter Lehmann, Zentral Amorika
 (Berlin 1920), pp. 654 ff; Edward Conzemius, The
 Jicaques of Honduras, IJAL 2.163 ff. (1921-23).
 The Chontal is mainly from Francisco Belmar,
 Lenguas Indigenas de Mexico (Mexico 1905), pp.
 188-217. Other principal sources: A. M. Halpern,
 216
This content downloaded from 12.14.13.130 on Tue, 11 Jul 2017 15:04:26 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 JICAQUE AS A HOKAN LANGUAGE
 tive list should be judged with this in mind.
 We list more obvious similarities, with
 emphasis on cases showing relationships of
 Jicaque, Hokan-Coahuiltecan and Gulf lan-
 guages.5 Comparison with other language
 stocks belonging to Sapir's Hokan Siouan
 grouping, is made in a few instances where
 the agreement is particularly striking. It is
 convenient to include also some Hokan
 comparisons without Jicaque cognates,
 where we need them for the lexico-statistic
 counts given farther on.
 -k adjective suffix, in Jicaque pek white,
 tek black, wek good, brek many; Yuman
 milk black, ahotk good, epilk warm; Pomo
 kedakedak red; Tonkawa makik yellow,
 maslak white.
 First person: Jicaque na-p I, na- vestigial
 prefix my; Yuma nya I; Esselen ene I,
 nis- my; Karok na, ni- I, na- me, nani-
 my; Washo le I, lew we; Chimariko no?ut
 I; Yana ai-?ni- a I; Comecrudo na I;
 Coahuiltec na- I; Karankawa naayi I;
 Tunica -ni I.
 Jicaque ku-p we; Chontal ki- I; Chumash
 ki- we, our; Tonkawa ka I; Pomo ke we;
 Karok kin- us; Yana -ni-gi we; Salinan ke
 I, ka we; Chitimacha -ki I, me.
 Second person: Chontal i-ma thou, i-
 manki you; Seri me thou; Yuma ma thou;
 Salinan mo thou, -m- thy; Pomo ma thou,
 mi thee, mi- thy; Esselen nemi thou, menis-
 thy; Yana ai?nu-ma thou; Washo mi thou;
 Chimariko mamut, mi- thou, m- thy; Shasta
 mai thou; Achomawi-Atsugewi mi- thy;
 Karok im thou; Comecrudo em- thou;
 Yuma IJAL 12.25-33, 147-51, 204-12, 13. 18-30,
 92-107, 147-66 (1946-7); Edward Sapir and Morris
 Swadesh, Yana Dictionary, ms. in American
 Philosophical Society Library; A. L. Kroeber,
 The Washo Language of East Central California
 and Nevada, UCPAAE 4.251-317 (1907); John R.
 Swanton, Linguistic Material from the Tribes of
 Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico (BAE-B
 127, 1940).
 5 Gulf is Mary R. Haas' term for 'the Musko-
 gean family of languages plus Natchez, Tunica,
 Chitimacha and Atakapa.' See The Proto-Gulf
 Word for Water (IJAL 17.71-79, 1951).
 Coahuiltec mai- thou, you; Chitimacha him
 thou; Tunica ma?a thou.
 Third person: Jicaque hu-p he; Chontal
 -u-pe- he; Chumash ho that; Salinan ho
 that; Chitimacha hus he, ha this, ho these;
 Pomo u that, he (distant).
 Jicaque na that, nahac there; Yuma
 nYaa- that, -ny stem of pronouns; Salinan
 na that; Yana na-gu- therefore; Comecrudo
 na-ni he, na- stem of pronouns; Tonkawa
 na?a thus; Chitimacha naat thus; Coahuiltec
 namo then.
 Jicaque kiwa here; Washo wa here,
 widi this; Yuma va6i here, va6a this; Chiti-
 macha we the, that.
 Interrogative: Jicaque kanlepa when, kat
 where; Chontal kana when, kaape where;
 Washo kunya where, kunyate what; Tunica
 ka- interrogative; Coahuiltec xat how many,
 xakat why; Comecrudo xat where, tokom
 whatever, thing; Chimariko qho- interroga-
 tive.
 Yuma av- what; Yana ?aci what, ?ambi
 who; Pomo am who, what; Chimariko
 ?awilla who; Chitimacha ?am what, ?ast
 how, ?ampinki where.
 Locative: Yuma -k at; Yana gi location,
 object relationship; Chitimacha ki at, kin
 with; Atakapa -ki in, on, -ik with.
 one: Jicaque pani; Chumash paka; Ton-
 kawa pax; Esselen pek; Yana bai; Chi-
 mariko p?un; Coahuiltec pil; Comecrudo
 pek-weten (cp. elek-weten two). Also Yuki
 pawa, powik.
 two: Chontal o-keSi; Seri kaxkum; Yuma
 xavik; Chimariko xoku; Yana ?ux-; Shastan
 xokwa, hoki; Pomo ko, xo; Esselen xulax.
 three: Jicaque kont; Chontal a-fan-e;
 Esselen xulap; Pomo xoxat; Yuma xamok;
 Chitimacha kaayci; Karankawa kaxayi.
 Proto form xwa.
 five: see hand.
 not: Jicaque kua none; Chontal k-;
 Chimariko xu-; Pomo kuyi; Yana ku-;
 Karankawa kom; Natchez koosac no; Ton-
 kawa ooko no.
 all: Jicaque put; Yana buiza-.
 arm-hand: Jicaque pul, pel arm, pus
 217
 NO. 3
This content downloaded from 12.14.13.130 on Tue, 11 Jul 2017 15:04:26 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF AMERICAN LINGUISTICS
 shoulder; Chumash pu arm, hand; Chi-
 mariko hitan-pu arm; Salinan puku arm;
 Subtiaba pahpu.
 ashes: Jicaque pe; Chontal X-api.
 back: Yuma -mak; Yana maki.
 bad: Jicaque marara; Yana malla-.
 belly: Jicaque kol belly; Chontal X-ikuu;
 Pomo koy, xo; Chumash aksu; Washo
 cigugus; Cotoname kox; Atakapa kom.
 big: see old.
 blood: Jicaque kat, ac; Chontal awas
 (perhaps read awac); Seri avat; Yuma
 xwat; Chumash axulis; Salinan ekata; Pomo
 hata; Yana wad?du-wi; Shasta-Achomawi
 axta; Karok ax; Comecrudo kyal; Coa-
 huiltec kwas, hac; Subtiaba e?di. Proto
 form axwat varying with xwat; Jicaque kat
 from xwat, ac conceivably from axwat-s
 with weakening of intervocalic x'v but may
 be unrelated. See red.
 bone: Jicaque kere; Chontal 1-ekaX; Washo
 di-bigefi; Natchez ekwel; Creek funi (from
 xwani); Comecrudo xi. Other languages
 show reflexes of xwa(n)- in compound with
 other elements: Chitimacha kaci; Atakapa
 ci (from kci); Seri itak; Chimariko hitxun;
 Yuman tyaka; isaka; Chumash se?; Salinan
 axaak; Pomo ihya; Yana ixdal-la.
 brother: Jicaque na-pey brother-in-law;
 Washo peyu younger brother; Chumash pe
 older brother.
 child: Jicaque way; Seri ove.
 chin, beard: Jicaque cek; Shasta cawak;
 Chumash actis (beard), Yana gawadci.
 cold: Jicaque coys; Chontal coos; Yuman
 cuq, Kiliwi axcaq; Yana xaa-cid?-; Chi-
 mariko xaca; Achomawi asca; Tonkawa
 hacex; Atakapa akcaw; Alabama kasatka.
 Proto form perhaps xacaxw.
 die: Jicaque te-puy; Yuma ?apooy. Per-
 haps also cp. Tunica lupi; Chitimacha
 nuupi-.
 drink: Jicaque mes; Atakapa em; Salinan
 esim; Yana sii-; Yuman Mohave ioi; Seri
 k-asi; Karok is; Chontal swa. Perhaps from
 imasi and isima as metathetized variants.
 excrement: Jicaque piye; Shasta ipxai
 (intestines); Yana pa-ci; Salinan pxat; Chi-
 mariko h-ipxa (intestines); Subtiaba amba
 (from apa).
 ear: Chontal ismac; Yuma ismalyka;
 Chimariko hisam; Pomo sima; Yana mal?gu;
 Seri islo. Also Yuki cema, sum.
 earth: Jicaque ma; Chontal X-amac; Seri
 amt; Yuma amat; Chimariko ama; Pomo
 ama; Comecrudo kamla. Also Siouan ma.
 eat: Jicaque te-k; Chontal -ka (bite);
 Salinan isax; Tonkawa yaxa-; Comecrudo
 kay; Chitimacha kaht- (bite), ku?t- (eat).
 eat: Yuma ama; Yana ma-; Chimariko
 hamma; Shastan -am-; Esselen am; Chu-
 mash umu; Salinan amo; Muskogi hump-.
 egg: Jicaque pehey; Chontal X-apik. Also
 Pawnee lipiku.
 eye: Jicaque wut; Atakapa wul; Salinan
 t-uwu (face).
 fat, grease: Jicaque ponik; Salinan upikit;
 Chimariko -xu- (obese); Yana pui-; Acho-
 mawi aphau.
 fire, hot, firewood: Jicaque awa fire, hot;
 Yuma a?aw fire; Salinan t-a?aw fire; Yana
 ?au-na fire; Chimariko ?a?pu fire, h-au-na
 tinder (-na wood); Shasta awa wood; Sub-
 tiaba aaguu fire.
 fly: Chontal -yu; Yuma ayer.
 foot: Chontal imic; Yuma iime; Washo
 mayop; Comecrudo emi.
 hand: Jicaque mas; Comecrudo mapi;
 Coahuiltec maw; Karankawa ecma (hand),
 ko-maso-pani (five); Chontal a-mahsi; Yana
 4iman-. Also Keresan -amast-; Yuki mee,
 miipa?t.
 hand: Yana dal-la; Washo tatu; Yuma
 isalya-; Achomawi ili (from itli); Chimariko
 hican; Pomo tana. Chimariko hitan-pu arm
 and xuli-teni left hand seem to contain the
 same element but without the change of t
 to c; this can be explained if we assume
 two forms, itan and tan, deriving hican from
 hi-ican but hitanpu from hi-tan-pu, or by
 assuming variant initial consonants.
 hear: Jicaque pakas; Yana ga-.
 heart: Jicaque -has; -hos; Chontal hus?an-
 cey; Coahuiltec xasaal; Tonkawa yacanan;
 Seri imos; Washo d-emli.
 218
 VOL. XIX
This content downloaded from 12.14.13.130 on Tue, 11 Jul 2017 15:04:26 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 JICAQUE AS A HOKAN LANGUAGE
 horn: Jicaque seme; Chitimacha ?ims;
 Comecrudo yemo; Cotoname yomo.
 hot: Jicaque pe; Chontal epal; Yuma
 ?apilY
 house: Jicaque wa; Yuma ?ava; Esselen
 iwa-no; Chimariko ?awa; Yana wa-wi;
 Comecrudo wamak; Subtiaba gwa.
 kill: Jicaque ti-kwaw; Pomo kum; Chi-
 mariko -ko-; Comecrudo kamaw; Chiti-
 macha ket-. Also Keresan kaut.
 leg: Jicaque tek; Chontal itungu.
 meat: Jicaque pisis; Pomo pete; Yana
 basi; Salinan 5as (elk); Chitimacha kipi;
 Muskogean nipu; Chontal l-isik.
 man: Jicaque kuy; Chontal X-akuy; Di-
 eguefio iku6; Pomo xak; Coahuiltec xaku;
 Tonkawa ha?akon; Chumash uxuy; Yuma
 nYako (father); Chumash gogo (father). Also
 Yuki kew. Compare old; the word for man
 may come from the word for adult.
 mother: Jicaque nee; Shastan ani; Pomo
 nixa; Yana nii-na; Washo -la.
 mouth: Jicaque lam, lala; Tonkawa kala;
 Comecrudo xal; Atakapa kat; Yuma axa?a;
 Pono xacita; Chumash ik; Chitimacha
 sa; Tunica ?ohu; Karankawa emi-akoy.
 Earliest form perhaps xa-la, with develop-
 ment in two directions as lala and axa, ixa.
 near: Jicaque nya-pin; Yuma xiipan;
 Atakapa ipal; Chitimacha paye (proximity);
 Karankawa pawail.
 night: Jicaque piste; Yana basii; Cotoname
 pay; Washo ta-pawit; Yana paawi-sa (night
 falls); Shasta upxa. Also Keresan ko-pso;
 Yuchi pato.
 nose: Jicaque mik (perhaps from m-yik);
 Seri hif, wuf; Yuma iixuu; Esselen hosis;
 Chimariko hoxu; Achomawi yammi; Karok
 yufi; Washo ?uyep; Comecrudo yax; Coto-
 name ya?x; Atakapa uc (from yuk-s);
 Chitimacha sis (assimilated from yis);
 Tunica risi; Muskogi yupo; Subtiaba d-
 aako. Perhaps yaxu, with various vowel
 assimilations.
 old: Jicaque kokoy; Chontal akuy (old),
 -koy (big); Seri kakox (big); Chumash
 no-xax (big); Chimariko xawini; Yana
 xaaba-; Yuma kwora?aka (old man).
 rain: Jicaque yipa (rain), hipe (it is
 raining), yupu (water); Seri ipka; Natchez
 yoba; Muskogean Alabama oyiba, Hitchiti
 ooba.
 rain: Chontal ukuy; Yuma ikwe-; Chiti-
 macha kaya.
 red: Jicaque ke; Pomo kedakedak; Ata-
 kapa kuc (from kut-s from ketu); Pomo
 kava; Yuman koxwat, ecawata, xwat; Yana
 ba-wad?-; Karok acut; Shasta ikwata; Acho-
 mawi acte. Possibly the same element as in
 blood or a different element which has
 become intertwined in some of the languages.
 river: Jicaque cew; Tonkawa cakaw;
 Chitimacha 6a?aat.
 salt: Jicaque carin; Chitimacha cahca
 (salty).
 sing: Chontal sow; Yuma aasvaar.
 sinew: Jicaque pupuy (vein, nerve) pey
 (rope); Yana baama; Shastan imme, pim,
 ippiu.
 sky: Jicaque mol (cloud); Chontal l-emaa;
 Seri amime; Yuma ?amay; Yana gabZa;
 Salinan lem (above, sky).
 sleep: Jicaque maha; Salinan me; Karan-
 kawa im; Comecrudo eme-t; Subtiaba ami;
 Chontal smay; Seri sim; Yuma asma;
 Pomo sima; Yana samsi-; Chimariko pohmu;
 Shastan icmas ici; Coahuiltec comoxwam.
 Also Keresan sipa-.
 smell: Jicaque kucuway; Chontal -we.
 stone: Jicaque pe; Chontal apik; Yuma
 ?avii; Chumash xip; Pomo xape; Esselen
 sefe; Salinan sxap; Chimariko qha?a (stone),
 qhaku (arrowpoint); Yana xaga (fl:nt);
 Pomo xaka (knife, obsidian); Salinan isak
 (knife), asaka (flint); Achomawi sat (arrow-
 point). Evidently two elements, pe and
 qhak, which combine to form a compound
 in Pomo and some of the other languages.
 sun: Jicaque laksak; Atakapa lak (sun,
 glitter); Pomo la (sun), alasa (moon);
 Comecrudo al; Muskogean Choctaw luwak
 (fire); Seri sax (sun), isax (moon); Salinan
 esxay (morning, day); Esselen asaca (day),
 asi (sun); Chimariko ?asi; Shasta a6ayi.
 The Jicaque is evidently a compound of
 219
 NO. 3
This content downloaded from 12.14.13.130 on Tue, 11 Jul 2017 15:04:26 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF AMERICAN LINGUISTICS
 two elements, perhaps ala-k glowing and
 sax sun.
 tongue: Jicaque perao; Chontal X-ipaX;
 Yuma iipalY; Seri ipl; Pomo pal; Shasta
 ipli; Chimariko h-ipen; Karok apri; Yana
 bawal?-la; Yana bal-la (mouth); Comecrudo
 expel; Atakapa nel; Chitimacha wen.
 tree: Yuma ?avii; Yana ?i-na; Esselen
 i?i.
 wash: Jicaque te-pays; Chontal -pah;
 Chimariko -pok-; Comecrudo pelepla; Ata-
 kapa pac (from pak-s).
 water: Chontal 1-aha; Seri ax; Yuma axa;
 Pomo xa, ka; Chimariko aqha; Yana xa-na;
 Karok as; Shastan aca, as, acsi; Salinan
 t-?a; Esselen asa-nax.
 white: Jicaque pek; S. Chumash pupu;
 Chontal fuka; Karankawa peka; Comecrudo
 pepok; Washo tal-popoy.
 wind: Chontal X-awa; Washo t-ewesgiw.
 woman: Jicaque kep, kek (woman), na-
 kom (wife); Chitimacha kica; Atakapa kis;
 Comecrudo kem; Seri kmam; Cotoname
 katam; Tonkawa kwaan; Chimariko punsar
 (from kwem-sa-r).
 woman: Jicaque mumuy (female); Yana
 mari?mi; Washo tamomo (woman), umlaya
 (wife); Pomo mata; Comecrudo mat
 (mother).
 4. That Jicaque is related to Hokan-
 Coahuiltecan is clearly evident from the
 quality and quantity of agreements. The
 next problem is to determine its exact
 position in the stock. The most convenient
 objective method for doing this is that of
 lexical statistics, based on percentages of
 cognates in a test vocabulary.6 Using a
 test list of 200 items, belonging to the
 sphere of every-day and relatively non-
 cultural meanings, we match them in each
 of the languages insofar as our material
 permits. The number of cognates is con-
 sidered by reference to the total number of
 pairs available for comparison.
 6See Swadesh, Lexico-Statistic Dating of
 Prehistoric Ethnic Contacts, APS-P 96.452-63
 (1952).
 We give the results of cognate counts
 for six languages-Jicaque, Chontal, Yuma,
 Yana, Washo, Comecrudo-taken as a
 fairly representative selection of the whole
 stock. Yana is taken as one of the Northern
 Hokan languages, a substock which also
 includes Pomo, Chimariko, Karok and
 Shasta-Achomawi. Yuma is taken as a
 representative of Seri-Yuman, because th
 available vocabulary is a little larger than
 Seri and it was found that both languages
 give approximately the same cognate per-
 centages. Esselen, Chumash and Salinan
 were omitted because of the limited vocabu-
 laries available. Only one of the Coahuiltecan
 languages is included, namely Comecrudo,
 which has the advantage of showing higher
 percentages of agreement with the Hokan
 languages than some of the others. We thus
 avoid the uncertainties of dealing with
 minimal percentages, approaching the quan-
 titative area of pure chance.
 Because of the limited lexical materials
 available for Jicaque and some of the other
 languages, we have available in the different
 pairs of languages as little as 55 pairs in
 some cases and never more than 89 pairs.
 It will some day be possible to improve
 this situation. We are also handicapped by
 the fact that, even with Sapir's several
 papers, the study of etymologies is not yet
 sufficiently developed to guarantee accurate
 identification of cognates in many cases.
 In deciding what to include and what to
 exclude, we believe we have erred somewhat
 more on the side of overcaution than other-
 wise.
 5. Following the method outlined, we
 obtained the results indicated below. For
 each pair of languages, we give the English
 for the items counted as cognates. The
 actual forms can be found in the cognate
 list above (3). To conserve space we do not
 list the items scored as non-cognates (e.g.
 Jicaque laksak, Chontal picu day or Jicaque
 pisis, Chontal lisik meat).
 For Jicaque-Chontal, there were 79 items
 220
 VOL. XIX
This content downloaded from 12.14.13.130 on Tue, 11 Jul 2017 15:04:26 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 JICAQUE AS A HOKAN LANGUAGE
 of meaning which could be matched in
 both languages. Of these, we apparently
 have cognate forms for identical meanings
 in the following 19 cases: three, ash, belly,
 blood, bone, cold, earth, eat, egg, leg, man,
 old, sleep, smell, stone, tongue, when, where,
 white.
 For Jicaque-Yuma, there are 17 cognates
 in 73 pairs: I, here, that, when, three, blood,
 die, dust, earth, eye, fire, hot, nose, sleep,
 stone, tongue, woman.
 For Jicaque-Yana, 12 cognates in 74
 pairs: I, one, three, all, bad, fire, hear, meat,
 night, old, rain, tongue.
 For Jicaque-Washo, 11 cognates in 75
 pairs: I, here, where, belly, bone, drink, green,
 head, mother, night, white.
 For Jicaque-Comecrudo, 13 cognates in
 89 pairs: one, blood, bone, earth, hand, hus-
 band, kill, mother, sleep, tongue, wash, white,
 women.
 For Chontal-Yuma, 11 cognates in 48
 pairs: blood, ear, fly, foot, hot, rain, sky,
 stone, tongue, water, sing.
 For Chontal Yana, 13 cognates in 75
 pairs: thou, two, five, blood, ear, hear, meat,
 not, salt, sleep, this, tongue, water.
 For Chontal Washo, 7 cognates in 55
 pairs: thou, you, two, belly, bone, where,
 wind.
 For Chontal-Comecrudo, 15 cognates in
 65 pairs: I, we, bird, bone, earth, fall, fish,
 foot, hear, mouth, not, sleep, tongue, water,
 white.
 For Yuma-Yana, 15 cognates in 67 pairs:
 what, at, two, three, back, blood, drink, ear,
 eat, fire, hand, sleep, tongue, tree, water.
 For Yuma-Washo, 7 cognates in 55 pairs:
 I, here, this, eat, father, foot, nose.
 For Yuma-Comecrudo, 7 cognates in
 56 pairs: blood, earth, foot, nose, sleep, tongue,
 water.
 For Yana-Washo, 11 cognates in 92 pairs:
 I, thou, we, two, dog, eat, hand, mother, night,
 say, woman.
 For Yana-Comecrudo, 12 cognates in 84
 pairs: one, blood, blow, fall, liver, not, rain,
 skin, sleep, snow, tongue, water.
 For Washo-Comecrudo, 6 cognates in 61
 pairs: all, bone, foot, mouth, nose, white.
 6. Reducing the foregoing figures to
 percentages, we find the following relation-
 ships:
 Chontal .......
 Yuma.........
 Yana..........
 Washo.........
 Comecrudo....
 Jicaque
 24
 23
 16
 15
 15
 Co
 23
 13
 14
 10
 Wa
 13
 13
 12
 Ya
 19
 21
 Yu
 23
 Presumably the different degrees of rela-
 tionship are based on the extent of contact
 among the Hokan languages when they
 were first diverging, that is, when they were
 regional dialects of a single language. The
 cognate percentages therefore suggest an
 approximate relative geography of early
 Hokan.
 The lowest cognate percentages among
 these languages, 10%, when interpreted
 by the lexico-statistic constant of 66%
 (i4 %) common retention after 1000 years,
 indicate that they represent the differ-
 entiated products of what was essentially
 a single language approximately five thou-
 sand years ago (calculated as 55 ? 7 cen-
 turies). Within a few centuries of that time,
 local dialects must have begun to show
 differences. Presumably contiguous dialects
 were largely the same while non-neighboring
 dialects were already noticeably divergent.
 Presumably, at that time, Comecrudo's
 neighbors to the east, the dialect forerunners
 of the present day Coahuiltecan and Gulf
 languages, shaded off in the same general
 way with lexical differences approximately
 proportional to the relative place of the
 dialects in the chain. Comecrudo fits into
 the dialect network of Hokan, since it is
 not more different from Chontal than the
 latter is from Jicaque or Yuma. This sug-
 gests that there is no sharp separation
 between Hokan and Coahuiltecan, that
 Hokan and Coahuiltecan and presumably
 NO. 3
 221
This content downloaded from 12.14.13.130 on Tue, 11 Jul 2017 15:04:26 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF AMERICAN LINGUISTICS
 also Gulf are not discrete stocks or branches
 but merely three segments of the same
 continuous chain.
 7. The present analysis helps to clarify
 the internal relationships of Hokan-Coa-
 huiltecan to some extent, but much remains
 to be done both in verifying the conclusions
 reached so far and in extending the analysis
 to the other languages in the Hokan-Coa-
 huiltecan-Gulf complex. To facilitate such
 study, it is clear that we need more complete
 vocabularies as well as more adequate
 phonetic and structural analyses. It is also
 necessary to exploit to the full the possibili-
 ties of reconstructing phonology and of
 checking etymologies afforded by the closer
 subgroupings within the total complex.
 For example, the study of Shasta-Acho-
 mawi-Atsugewi or of Seri-Yuman would
 make it possible to take elements back a
 thousand or two years in time, filling out
 the details of the earlier phonetic form, and
 would therefore greatly increase the as-
 surance with which we can compare words
 of totally different subdivisions of Hokan.
 222
 VOL. XIX
This content downloaded from 12.14.13.130 on Tue, 11 Jul 2017 15:04:26 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
